---
icon: material/table-plus
---

# Cross-shard INSERT

An INSERT statement that doesn't specify a sharding key, has multiple sharding keys, or is targetting an [omnisharded](../omnishards.md) table, is a cross-shard statement and requires special handling, as described below.

## How it works

Cross-shard INSERT statements fall into one of three categories, each one being handled differently:

| Statement | Handling |
|-|-|
| INSERT into an [omnisharded](#omnisharded-tables) table | Sent concurrently to all shards. |
| INSERT a single tuple into a [sharded](#sharded-tables) table | Sent to one of the shards only, depending on [primary key](#primary-key-injection) generation strategy. |
| INSERT [multiple tuples](#multiple-tuples) into a  [sharded](#sharded-tables) table | Rewritten into separate statements and sent separately to the matching shards. |

Applications using PgDog don't need to concern themselves with implementation details and can use the database normally. However, there are some trade-offs when using cross-shard queries which are documented below.

## Omnisharded tables

For queries that target [omnisharded](../omnishards.md) tables, the statement is sent to all shards concurrently. This ensures that the data is identical on all shards, for example:

```postgresql
INSERT INTO cities (id, city_name, country_code, created_at)
VALUES ($1, $2, $3, now())
```

This is a common pattern for tables that don't have a sharding key, or tables that contain small amounts of data. The same row will be created on all shards and queries can then either fetch it directly or join it with other sharded and omnisharded tables.

### Omnisharded consistency

Unless [two-phase commit](../2pc.md) is enabled, inserts into omnisharded tables are not guaranteed to be atomic. It is possible for the statement to succeed on some of the shards and not others.

If you don't want to or can't enable two-phase commit on your database shards, consider sending cross-shard inserts inside a transaction or write idempontent statements, for example:

```postgresql
BEGIN;
INSERT INTO cities (id, city_name, country_code, created_at)
VALUES ($1, $2, $3, now())
ON CONFLICT (city_name) DO NOTHING;
-- You will receive an ack or an error from all shards here.
COMMIT;
```

This gives you a much higher chance of writing rows on all shards, since you will know if your statement violated a constraint (e.g., unique index or `NOT NULL` check) before committing the transaction.

!!! warning "Two-phase commit"
    Enabling [two-phase commit](../2pc.md) is highly recommended. It's been tested and works well in production.

### Primary keys in omnisharded tables

While UUID primary keys are common and are easily generated by the application, it is still a common practice to use `BIGSERIAL` (or `SERIAL`) columns to uniquely identify rows in databases. 

These are typically powered by a sequence to ensure non-recurring values are automatically generated for each new row. Howeer, sharded databases can't use sequences directly because they are not aware of other shards and will produce duplicate values across databases.

To work around this, PgDog provides a way to generate [unique integers](../unique-ids.md) in the proxy using a distributed and shard-aware algorithm. Since the integer is generated inside PgDog before sending the query to Postgres, its value will be the same for all rows sent to each shard.

### Manual primary key generation

To use unique IDs as primary keys (or in any other column) in omnisharded tables, you can call the `pgdog.unique_id()` function directly in the `VALUES` clause of an INSERT statement, for example:

```postgresql
INSERT INTO cities (id, city_name, country_code, created_at)
VALUES (pgdog.unique_id(), $1, $2, now());
```

The function is evaluated inside PgDog, replacing the value it generates directly into the query. This works for all queries, including prepared statements.

Each call to `pgdog.unique_id()` generates a unique value, so it's possible to use it multiple times inside the same query and get different numbers, for example:

=== "Query"
    ```postgresql
    SELECT
        pgdog.unique_id() AS one,
        pgdog.unique_id() AS two;
    ```
=== "Result"
    ```
           one         |        two
    -------------------+-------------------
     12014338348945408 | 12014338348945409
    (1 row)
    ```

This function can be used with any tables, not just omnisharded ones, or independently of any tables at all.


### Automatic primary key generation

If you're using an ORM like ActiveRecord, Prisma, SQLAlchemy, etc., it's often not easy or possible to modify how it generates its INSERT statements. Thankfully the SQL standard specifies a couple ways for the client to make the database generate the primary key automatically, which PgDog can intercept and handle.

#### How it works

It's common for some ORMs to omit columns which the database is expected to generate values for. Since PgDog has knowledge of the [database schema](../schema_management/index.md), it can detect this scenario and inject the call to `pgdog.unique_id()` automatically, for example:

=== "Original query"
    ```postgresql
    INSERT INTO cities (city_name, country_code, created_at)
    VALUES ($1, $2, now())
    ```
=== "Rewritten query"
    ```postgresql
    INSERT INTO cities (id, city_name, country_code, created_at)
    VALUES ($3, $1, $2, now())
    ```

    The value of parameter `$3` is automatically set by PgDog to the value returned by the [unique ID](../unique-ids.md) generator.

PgDog can also [automatically inject](#primary-key-injection) the function call into INSERT queries, so this feature works with ORMs like ActiveRecord, Prisma, etc., out of the box.

An alternative way to write that query can is to use the `DEFAULT` keyword, which explicitely tells the database to use the configured default for the column. PgDog can handle that scenario as well and will inject its generated primary key into the row.

#### Configuration

This primary key generation feature is still relatively new and **disabled** by default. To enable it, configure it in [`pgdog.toml`](../../configuration/pgdog.toml/rewrite.md):

=== "pgdog.toml"
    ```toml
    [rewrite]
    enabled = true
    primary_key = "rewrite"
    ```
=== "Helm chart"
    ```yaml
    rewrite:
      enabled: true
      primaryKey: rewrite
    ```

## Sharded tables

INSERT statements targeting sharded tables will commonly provide the sharding key. A notable exception to this rule is tables that shard on the primary key, which is often database-generated, e.g., using a sequence.

The simplest way to work around this is to use the `pgdog.unique_id()` function to create a unique identifier on the fly, for example:

```postgresql
INSERT INTO users (id, email, created_at)
VALUES (pgdog.unique_id(), $1, $2)
RETURNING *;
```

PgDog will inject a unique integer into the query and send it to the corresponding shard as a  [direct-to-shard](../query-routing.md) statement.

### Primary keys

For sharded tables that have `BIGINT` (or `INTEGER`) primary keys, you can rely on the [unique ID](../unique-ids.md) generator, same as for [omnisharded](#primary-keys-in-omnisharded-tables) tables.

However, since our algorithm produces pretty large numbers, this may not always be suitable for all applications, especially the ones that pass those IDs directly to a JavaScript/TypeScript frontend which can't handle large integers. For this reason, we created [sharded sequences](../sequences.md).

### Sharded sequences

!!! note "Installation required"
    For sharded sequences to work correctly, they have to be installed into the database first.
    Read more about this [here](../sequences.md).

Sharded sequences will apply a hashing function to a PostgreSQL sequence, creating unique and monotonically-increasing values, with small gaps in-between. They are great for generating primary keys for sharded tables, since they will create cluster-unique values and require no special handling or query rewriting inside PgDog.

For tables using sharded sequences for primary key generation and which use the primary key for sharding, PgDog will send the query to only one shard (using round robin) and let the database generate the sharding key automatically, for example:

```postgresql
INSERT INTO users (email, created_at) VALUES ($1, $2)
RETURNING id;
```

The `id` column will be generated by the database (and not PgDog), will be globally unique, and will match the shard its generated on, as guaranteed by the [sharded sequence](../sequences.md) implementation.

!!! warning "Sharded tables only"
    Make sure to **never** use sharded sequences with **omnisharded** tables. They are not guaranteed to generate the same value on all shards, even with [two-phase commit](../2pc.md), and could cause primary key drift across shards.

## Composite primary keys

!!! warning "Not currently supported"
    Composite primary keys are not currently supported for primary key generation inside PgDog.

Primary key injection only works for `BIGINT` primary key columns. Composite primary keys or other data types are not currently supported, but are on the [roadmap](../../../roadmap.md).

## Multiple tuples

In order to create multiple rows at once, the PostgreSQL query syntax supports sending multiple tuples in one statement. For example:

```postgresql
INSERT INTO users
    (id, email, created_at)
VALUES
    ($1, $2, $3),
    ($4, $5, $6);
```

In sharded databases, however, the individual tuples are likely to belong on different shards. To make this work, PgDog can automatically rewrite the statement and send each tuple to the right shard. Using the example above, the result of that operation produces two single-tuple statements:

=== "Statement 1"
      ```postgresql
      INSERT INTO users
          (id, email, created_at)
      VALUES
          ($1, $2, $3)
      ```
=== "Statement 2"
    ```postgresql
    INSERT INTO users
        (id, email, created_at)
    VALUES
        ($1, $2, $3)
    ```

This works for all queries, including prepared statements. PgDog will rewrite all Postgres protocol messages (e.g., `Bind`, `Describe`, etc.) without the application having to change its queries.

This feature is relatively new and is **disabled** by default. It can be enabled in [`pgdog.toml`](../../../configuration/pgdog.toml/rewrite.md):

=== "pgdog.toml"
    ```toml
    [rewrite]
    enabled = true
    split_inserts = "rewrite"
    ```
=== "Helm chart"
    ```yaml
    rewrite:
      enabled: true
      splitInserts: rewrite
    ```

### Transaction required

Since multi-tuple inserts will likely write rows to several shards, PgDog requires the application to start a transaction before executing such queries. For example:

```postgresql
BEGIN;
INSERT INTO users (email, created_at) VALUES ($1, $2), ($3, $4);
COMMIT; -- or ROLLBACK;
```

If a transaction isn't started and a multi-tuple statement is sent by the application, PgDog will return an error and abort the request.

Requiring transactions ensures that if one of the `INSERT` statements fails, e.g., because of a unique constraint violation, the transaction can be rolled back, leaving the database in a consistent state.

!!! warning "Two-phase commit"

    Much like [omnisharded](#omnisharded-tables) table inserts, it's best to enable [two-phase commit](../2pc.md) before attempting cross-shard multi-tuple inserts. This feature increases the likelihood that cross-shard transactions are atomic.
